📌 Phase 3 – Dataset Creation
1️⃣ Create Legal Q&A Instruction Dataset

Your goal is to teach the model how to answer legal questions using Bare Acts, not to give opinions.

🔹 Types of Questions to Include (High Quality)

✅ Fact-based

What is the punishment under Section 420 IPC?

Define “cheating” as per IPC.

✅ Section lookup

Which section deals with criminal breach of trust?

Under which section is theft defined?

✅ Conditional legal queries

What happens if a public servant commits criminal misconduct?

Is cheating punishable with imprisonment?

✅ Explanation-based (strictly textual)

Explain Section 107 IPC.

What does “abetment” mean under IPC?

❌ Exclude

“Is this fair?”

“Is this law good or bad?”

“Should this person be punished?”

Hypothetical courtroom judgments

2️⃣ Convert Data into Instruction–Response Format

This is instruction tuning, not plain Q&A.

🔹 Recommended Format (Instruction Dataset)
{
  "instruction": "What is the punishment for cheating under Indian Penal Code?",
  "input": "",
  "response": "As per Section 420 of the Indian Penal Code, cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property is punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine."
}

🔹 With Context (Optional but Powerful)
{
  "instruction": "Explain Section 107 IPC.",
  "input": "Indian Penal Code, 1860",
  "response": "Section 107 of the Indian Penal Code defines abetment. A person abets the doing of a thing if he instigates any person to do that thing, engages in a conspiracy for doing that thing, or intentionally aids by any act or illegal omission."
}

3️⃣ Ground Answers Strictly in Law Text

This is non-negotiable for legal AI.

🔹 Answer Rules

✅ Answers must:

Quote or paraphrase only Bare Act content

Mention Section number explicitly

Avoid assumptions or interpretations

Use neutral legal language

❌ Avoid:

“In most cases…”

“Courts usually think…”

“It depends on the judge…”

🔹 Good Response Pattern
According to Section ___ of the ___ Act, ...

4️⃣ Validate Correctness of Answers
🔹 Validation Pipeline (Recommended)

Step 1: Automated Checks

Section number exists

Act name matches section

No hallucinated punishments

Length within limits

Step 2: Text Match Validation

Response must be traceable to:

Same Act

Same Section

≥ 90% semantic similarity with source text

Step 3: Manual Sampling

Review 5–10% randomly

Check:

Legal correctness

Missing clauses

Wrong penalties

5️⃣ Remove Ambiguous or Opinion-Based Questions

Legal datasets must be deterministic.

🔹 Examples to Remove

❌ “Is Section 498A misused?”
❌ “Was IPC written fairly?”
❌ “Is life imprisonment justified?”
❌ “Who is guilty in this case?”

🔹 Replace With

✅ “What does Section 498A IPC state?”
✅ “What is the punishment under Section 498A?”
✅ “Define cruelty as per IPC.”

6️⃣ Balance & Coverage

Ensure dataset diversity:

Dimension	Coverage
Acts	IPC, CrPC, CPC, IT Act, NDPS
Sections	Definitions + Punishments
Difficulty	Easy → Medium
Question Type	Lookup, Explain, Conditional

Target:

3–5 questions per section

Avoid repetitive wording

7️⃣ Final Dataset Output Format
🔹 Training-Ready JSONL
{"instruction":"Define theft under IPC","input":"","response":"Section 378 of the Indian Penal Code defines theft as..."}
{"instruction":"What is the punishment for criminal breach of trust?","input":"","response":"As per Section 406 IPC..."}

🧠 Output of Phase 3

At the end of this phase, you will have:

✅ High-quality legal instruction dataset
✅ Zero opinionated content
✅ Fully grounded legal answers
✅ Ready for fine-tuning or RAG evaluation